Added appendix about fuzzy message detection (#22)
clearmatics/zeth-specifications: appendices/appendix05-fmd.tex

% !TEX root = ../zeth-protocol-specification.tex

\chapter{Fuzzy message detection}\label{appendix:fmd}

> As explained in~\ref{zeth-protocol:zeth-receive} and~\ref{client-security:syncing}, in order to receive $\zethnotes$, a $\zeth$ user must listen on an broadcast channel, and try to decrypt all encrypted events emitted by the $\mixer$ contract. While providing the best potential for indistinguishability (all users scan the chain data and expose the same behavior), such routine is particularly expensive to carry out, especially for computationally restricted users (i.e.~users with computationally limited devices).

Reviewer: > in order to receive $\zethnotes$, a $\zeth$ user must listen on an broadcast channel
->
in order to receive $\zethnotes$, a $\zeth$ user must listen on a broadcast channel

> As a way to trade-off the users' anonymity and the ``expansiveness'' of the message detection routine in privacy-preserving protocols, Beck et al.~\cite{DBLP:journals/iacr/BeckLMG21} introduced the notion of \emph{fuzzy message detection schemes}. These protocols allow the delegation of message detection to untrustworthy servers, without revealing precisely which messages belong to the receiver, by allowing receivers to enforce false-positive detection rates.

Reviewer 2: `expansiveness` -> `cost` ?

> Such schemes provide a promising avenue for reconciliating recipient anonymity (via \emph{key ambiguity} and (message) \emph{detection ambiguity}) and the performance of the $\zethnotes$ receiving algorithm that currently needs to run on a machine belonging to (or trusted by) the recipient.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Such schemes provide a promising avenue for reconciliating recipient anonymity (via \emph{key ambiguity} and message \emph{detection ambiguity}) and the performance of the $\zethnotes$ receiving algorithm that currently needs to run on a machine belonging to (or trusted by) the recipient.
```

Nevertheless, the selection of the fuzzy detection parameters for $\zeth$ is a challenge, especially the selection of the false-positive rate.

> In fact, not only is this parameter public (shared with the potentially adversarial server) --- which is an additional ``leakage'' of information\footnote{limited to one server (in the best case), or to the whole network (in the worst case --- if the adversary broadcasts all its known information)} ---, but also, such parameter is likely to be set to different values (for different users) depending on the amount of payments they receive through $\zeth$. This, coupled with the existing gas-related leakages will increase the set of information leakages in the protocol, which consequences are hard to properly estimate. Furthermore, letting such parameters to be set by users raises other challenges for wallet developers, User eXperience (UX) engineers and documentation engineers. In fact, any degree of liberty let to the user increases the potential for ``deviation'' from the ``expected/indistinguishable'' behavior. Hence, UX/documentation/wallet engineers must be able to suggest sensible default values for such parameters, must extensively document the purpose of these parameters and must extensively educate the end-users to maximize the chances of adequate parameter selections. While feasible, such tasks are largely relying on modeling efforts\footnote{See e.g.~\url{https://git.openprivacy.ca/openprivacy/fuzzytags-sim}}, which simplify real-world systems and can only be used to simulate a limited set of situations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Under the scheme presented in \cite{DBLP:journals/iacr/BeckLMG21}, not only is this parameter public (an additional ``leakage'' of information\footnote{limited to one server (in the best case), or to the whole network (in the worst case --- if the adversary broadcasts all its known information)}, including to potentially adversarial nodes), but this parameter is likely to be set to different values by different users, based on the number of payments they receive through $\zeth$.  This, coupled with the existing gas-related leakages, will increase the set of information leakages in the protocol, the consequences of which are hard to properly estimate. Furthermore, letting such parameters be set by users raises other challenges for wallet developers, User eXperience (UX) engineers and documentation engineers. In fact, any degree of liberty given to the user increases the potential for ``deviation'' from the ``expected/indistinguishable'' behavior. Hence, UX/documentation/wallet engineers must be able to suggest sensible default values for such parameters, must extensively document the purpose of these parameters and must extensively educate the end-users to maximize the chances of adequate parameter selections. While feasible, such tasks largely rely on modeling efforts\footnote{See e.g.~\url{https://git.openprivacy.ca/openprivacy/fuzzytags-sim}}, which simplify real-world systems and can only be used to simulate a limited set of situations.
```

Reviewer: User eXperience (UX) engineers -> user experience (UX) engineers

> Under the scheme presented in \cite{DBLP:journals/iacr/BeckLMG21}, not only is this parameter public (an additional ``leakage'' of information\footnote{limited to one server (in the best case), or to the whole network (in the worst case --- if the adversary broadcasts all its known information)}, including to potentially adversarial nodes), but this parameter is likely to be set to different values by different users, based on the number of payments they receive through $\zeth$.  This, coupled with the existing gas-related leakages, will increase the set of information leakages in the protocol, the consequences of which are hard to properly estimate. Furthermore, letting such parameters be set by users raises other challenges for wallet developers, user experience (UX) engineers and documentation engineers. In fact, any degree of liberty given to the user increases the potential for ``deviation'' from the ``expected/indistinguishable'' behavior. Hence, UX/documentation/wallet engineers must be able to suggest sensible default values for such parameters, must extensively document the purpose of these parameters and must extensively educate the end-users to maximize the chances of adequate parameter selections. While feasible, such tasks largely rely on modeling efforts\footnote{See e.g.~\url{https://git.openprivacy.ca/openprivacy/fuzzytags-sim}}, which simplify real-world systems and can only be used to simulate a limited set of situations.

Reviewer 3: Just curious what exactly '_gas-related leakages'_ mean. Receivers spend all their incoming transactions with a specific gasPrice-level all the time _or_ they would use some salient and unique gas prices?

Author: Sure. By
> This, coupled with the existing gas-related leakages, will increase the set of information leakages in the protocol, the consequences of which are hard to properly estimate.

I refer to the fact that interacting with the Zeth contracts (in the general sense, in fact, this generally happens while carrying out a `Mix` call, which is during a payment (a dummy payment or a real one)). The reason I mention that here is because, gas-related leakages are accessible to all passive adversaries having access to the chain data (i.e. everyone, if you consider real life systems and services like Etherscan that provide access to Ethereum data via a website, for all people who are not node operator/miners)

Author: > Receivers spend all their incoming transactions with a specific gasPrice-level all the time or they would use some salient and unique gas prices?

Receiving does not require chain calls (only lookups in the chain state), and so is a gas free operation (i.e. you can receive a Zeth note without even having an Ethereum address, and thus be fully anonymous in that regard because Zeth has a distinct addressing scheme, the encryption scheme we use in key-private, and messages are sent via contract events - i.e. broadcast - which allows to get a *confidential receiver-anonymous channel*, as in https://eprint.iacr.org/2013/238.pdf)

In
> This, coupled with the existing gas-related leakages, will increase the set of information leakages in the protocol, the consequences of which are hard to properly estimate.

I refer to the fact that interacting with the Zeth contracts to trigger state transitions, in the general sense, costs gas (as for all state transitions on Ethereum). With Zeth, such state transitions generally happen while carrying out a `Mix` call, which is during a payment (which may be a dummy one or a real one - they are indistinguishable if `vout` is not set), and **not** while receiving notes. In fact, receiving notes only requires access to the chain data and can thus be queried straight into one's local (synced) node state or via RPC calls to a node (this isn't a chain state transition and thus does not cost gas).
The reason I mention gas-related leakages here is because, such information leakages are accessible to all passive adversaries having access to the chain data (i.e. pretty much everyone, when we consider services like Etherscan that provide access to the chain data via a website). This means that such gas-related leakages surely are accessible to **all** servers involved in the fuzzy message detection protocol. Hence, in addition to seeing "Ethereum balances going up and down due to transaction gas during Zeth `Mix` calls", these servers can also use leakages related to the Fuzzy Message Detection protocol to carry out side channel attacks (e.g. they may be able to derive some potential upper bounds on the number of received payments by a user (e.g. by using the false positive rate) + see the number of `Mix` calls done by the same user + track the public transactions made by the same user (e.g. ETH payments etc) + use off-chain information etc to refine their models and adjust their attack).

In other words, in addition to the chain data, a malicious fuzzy detection server operator has also access to (at least) the false/positive rate `p` (in fact, the authors stressed that it wasn't intended to be private information -> `"we stress that in our formulation, we do not attempt to hide the value of p from the adversary"`, page 3 of the [ePrint](https://eprint.iacr.org/2021/089.pdf)). Since the value of this parameter is bound to a deposited key (and so, new key material needs to be generated and distributed to change this param), this gives - once more - some leverage to the attacker.

Here is a **dummy**/very simple example to illustrate the point:

- StoreX has an Ethereum address and uses Zeth to receive payments from its consumers. It its bills with Zeth too.
- StoreX wants to use a fuzzy detection system in order to have a more lightweight receiving routine for the Zeth notes (i.e. it doesn't want to bother scanning the chain data to receive notes).
- StoreX sells 50 goods per day on average (initially deposits a detection key with false positive 2% on a fuzzy detection server that generally receives 10000 messages/day) -> 0.02 * 10000 = 200 messages/day will be false positive for the merchant (not too bad, its traffic is fairly well covered)
- But, the sales period approaches (information publicly accessible -> e.g. in mainstream medias), StoreX has some great offers and its selling record hits some new highs, e.g. 9000 sales/day (information publicly accessible -> e.g. social medias, lots of "out of stocks" on StoreX website, media coverage etc) -> now, StoreX's received set of messages on the fuzzy detection system isn't well covered anymore (9 msgs out of 10 are for StoreX on the fuzzy message detection server...) -> sure, StoreX can use another server, and/or adjust the false-positive rate, but this is a potential source of leakages etc. Furthermore, the value set for `p` may also carry information about the expected number of payments of the users (proportional to the number of payments received by the server) -> which again can be leveraged.

So, set this dummy example apart, I simply state here that any leakage/bit of information that becomes available because of he use of FMD, can be leveraged (along with existing leakages sources) by an passive adversary monitoring the network. Hence, it's always important to tradeoff the complexity of the various algos and procedures, with the leakages (the `receive` algo we describe in the specs exhibits an optimal indistinguishable behavior (every Zeth user scans every block), but this surely is computationally expensive, so alternative methods may be used modulo a careful privacy/security analysis)

Reviewer 3: Thanks a lot for the thorough answer! It gives a lot of food for thought on how one could improve on the original FMD paper. E.g., it might be interesting to come up with a scheme where the false positive rate is not known to the adversary (e.g., the server). Although the privacy gains even in this case are not self-evident. k-anonymity style privacy guarantees are so brittle that maybe even this improvement would not significantly improve the complexity of deanonymisation given all the side-channel leakages you elaborated above!

> Moreover, not being able to easily (i.e.~without distributing new keys) update the false-positive rate over time is problematic in the context of $\zeth$ as it does not allow users to have ``elastic'' false-positive probabilities to account for potential spikes in the number of payments they receive (e.g.~a merchant during sales).

Reviewer: ``elastic'' -> adaptable
